README.md, before:

The Berkeley Out-of-Order RISC-V Processor
================================================

This is the source repository for the RV64G RISC-V superscalar Berkeley Out-of-Order Machine (BOOM), 
written in the [Chisel hardware construction language](http://chisel.eecs.berkeley.edu). BOOM 
is a synthesizable core that targets ASIC processes. It can run on an FPGA (50 MHz on a zc706), 
but optimizing it to be an FPGA soft-core is a non-goal.


 Feature | BOOM
--- | ---
ISA | RISC-V (RV64G)
Synthesizable |√
FPGA |√
Parameterized |√
Floating Point (IEEE 754-2008) |√
Atomic Memory Op Support |√
Caches |√
Viritual Memory |√
Boots Linux |√

**Google group:** (https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/riscv-boom)

For documentation on BOOM visit (https://ccelio.github.io/riscv-boom-doc).

The [wiki](https://github.com/ucb-bar/riscv-boom/wiki) may also have more information. 

**Important!**

This repository is **NOT A SELF-RUNNING** repository. To instantiate a BOOM core, please use the Rocket chip generator found in the rocket-chip git repository (https://github.com/ucb-bar/rocket-chip).

BOOM depends on the Chisel project. It also depends on [Rocket](https://github.com/ucb-bar/rocket), [uncore](https://github.com/ucb-bar/uncore), and [junction](https://github.com/ucb-bar/junctions) source codes.


**Requirements**

These instructions assume you have already installed the [riscv-tools](https://github.com/riscv/riscv-tools) toolchain.

If you have not, follow additional instructions below.


**Directions**

To build a BOOM C++ emulator and run BOOM through a couple of simple tests:

````
   $ git clone https://github.com/ucb-bar/rocket-chip.git
   $ cd rocket-chip
   $ git checkout boom
   $ git submodule update --init
   $ cd riscv-tools
   $ git submodule update --init --recursive riscv-tests
   $ cd ../emulator; make run CONFIG=BOOMCPPConfig
````
 
**Installing the RISC-V Toolchain**

The following (modified) instructions will also build the RISC-V toolchain (if
you have not already do so). You will need to set the $RISCV environment
variable (where the toolchain will be installed) and you will need to add
$RISCV/bin to your $PATH.

````
   $ export RISCV=/path/to/install/riscv/toolchain
   $ export PATH="${PATH}:$RISCV/bin"
   $ git clone https://github.com/ucb-bar/rocket-chip.git
   $ cd rocket-chip
   $ git checkout boom
   $ git submodule update --init
   $ cd riscv-tools
   $ git submodule update --init --recursive
   $ ./build.sh
   $ cd ../emulator; make run CONFIG=BOOMCPPConfig
````

For more detailed information on the toolchain, visit 
[the riscv-tools repository](https://github.com/riscv/riscv-tools).

**Using the gem5 O3 Pipeline Viewer with BOOM**

The O3 Pipeline Viewer is an out-of-order pipeline viewer included in the
gem5 suite. BOOM is capable of generating traces compatible with the
pipeline viewer, which is useful for understanding what causes
pipeline stalls and flushes.

To generate gem5 compatible traces, first set O3PIPEVIEW_PRINTF in
boom/src/main/scala/consts.scala to true:
````
   val O3PIPEVIEW_PRINTF   = true  // dump trace for O3PipeView from gem5
````

Rebuild and rerun BOOM. You should find the traces (*.out) in 
emulator/output/. Next, go to your gem5 directory. To generate the
visualization run:
````
   ./util/o3-pipeview.py -o pipeview.out --color <TRACE_FILE>
````
You can view the visualization by running:
````
   less -r pipeview.out
````
For more details, visit the [gem5 wiki](http://www.m5sim.org/Visualization).



**More Info**

* **The Design Spec** - https://ccelio.github.io/riscv-boom-doc
* **Google group:** - https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/riscv-boom
* **The Wiki** - https://github.com/ucb-bar/riscv-boom/wiki
* **Tech Report** - The Berkeley Out-of-Order Machine (BOOM): An Industry-Competitive, Synthesizable, Parameterized RISC-V Processor (https://www.eecs.berkeley.edu/Pubs/TechRpts/2015/EECS-2015-167.html)
* **Slides** - RISC_V Workshop #3 (http://riscv.org/workshop-jan2016/Wed1345%20RISCV%20Workshop%203%20BOOM.pdf)
* **Video** - RISC-V Workshop #3 (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JuJDPbzWpR0)
* **Slides** - RISC-V Workshop #2 (http://riscv.org/workshop-jun2015/riscv-boom-workshop-june2015.pdf)
* **Video** - RISC-V Workshop #2 (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z8UInbiQbdA)


**Disclaimer!**

The RISC-V privileged ISA and platform specs are still in flux. BOOM will do its best to stay up-to-date with it!

BOOM is a work-in-progress and remains in active development.


**FAQ**

To be filled in as questions are asked...

Commit message:

Pipeview - added store-completion support
   When stores "complete" (are successfully received by the cache) is now
   tracked, and can be displayed in the pipe viewer.

README.md, after:

The Berkeley Out-of-Order RISC-V Processor
================================================

This is the source repository for the RV64G RISC-V superscalar Berkeley Out-of-Order Machine (BOOM), 
written in the [Chisel hardware construction language](http://chisel.eecs.berkeley.edu). BOOM 
is a synthesizable core that targets ASIC processes. It can run on an FPGA (50 MHz on a zc706), 
but optimizing it to be an FPGA soft-core is a non-goal.


 Feature | BOOM
--- | ---
ISA | RISC-V (RV64G)
Synthesizable |√
FPGA |√
Parameterized |√
Floating Point (IEEE 754-2008) |√
Atomic Memory Op Support |√
Caches |√
Viritual Memory |√
Boots Linux |√

**Google group:** (https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/riscv-boom)

For documentation on BOOM visit (https://ccelio.github.io/riscv-boom-doc).

The [wiki](https://github.com/ucb-bar/riscv-boom/wiki) may also have more information. 

**Important!**

This repository is **NOT A SELF-RUNNING** repository. To instantiate a BOOM core, please use the Rocket chip generator found in the rocket-chip git repository (https://github.com/ucb-bar/rocket-chip).

BOOM depends on the Chisel project. It also depends on [Rocket](https://github.com/ucb-bar/rocket), [uncore](https://github.com/ucb-bar/uncore), and [junction](https://github.com/ucb-bar/junctions) source codes.


**Requirements**

These instructions assume you have already installed the [riscv-tools](https://github.com/riscv/riscv-tools) toolchain.

If you have not, follow additional instructions below.


**Directions**

To build a BOOM C++ emulator and run BOOM through a couple of simple tests:

````
   $ git clone https://github.com/ucb-bar/rocket-chip.git
   $ cd rocket-chip
   $ git checkout boom
   $ git submodule update --init
   $ cd riscv-tools
   $ git submodule update --init --recursive riscv-tests
   $ cd ../emulator; make run CONFIG=BOOMCPPConfig
````
 
**Installing the RISC-V Toolchain**

The following (modified) instructions will also build the RISC-V toolchain (if
you have not already do so). You will need to set the $RISCV environment
variable (where the toolchain will be installed) and you will need to add
$RISCV/bin to your $PATH.

````
   $ export RISCV=/path/to/install/riscv/toolchain
   $ export PATH="${PATH}:$RISCV/bin"
   $ git clone https://github.com/ucb-bar/rocket-chip.git
   $ cd rocket-chip
   $ git checkout boom
   $ git submodule update --init
   $ cd riscv-tools
   $ git submodule update --init --recursive
   $ ./build.sh
   $ cd ../emulator; make run CONFIG=BOOMCPPConfig
````

For more detailed information on the toolchain, visit 
[the riscv-tools repository](https://github.com/riscv/riscv-tools).

**Using the gem5 O3 Pipeline Viewer with BOOM**

The O3 Pipeline Viewer is an out-of-order pipeline viewer included in the
gem5 suite. BOOM is capable of generating traces compatible with the
pipeline viewer, which is useful for understanding what causes
pipeline stalls and flushes.

To generate gem5 compatible traces, first set O3PIPEVIEW_PRINTF in
boom/src/main/scala/consts.scala to true:
````
   val O3PIPEVIEW_PRINTF   = true  // dump trace for O3PipeView from gem5
````

Rebuild and rerun BOOM. You should find the traces (*.out) in 
emulator/output/. To generate the visualization run:
````
   path_to_gem5/util/o3-pipeview.py --color --store_completions -o pipeview.out <TRACE_FILE>
````
You can view the visualization by running:
````
   less -r pipeview.out
````
For more details (and to download o3-pipeview.py), visit the [gem5 wiki](http://www.m5sim.org/Visualization).



**More Info**

* **The Design Spec** - https://ccelio.github.io/riscv-boom-doc
* **Google group:** - https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/riscv-boom
* **The Wiki** - https://github.com/ucb-bar/riscv-boom/wiki
* **Tech Report** - The Berkeley Out-of-Order Machine (BOOM): An Industry-Competitive, Synthesizable, Parameterized RISC-V Processor (https://www.eecs.berkeley.edu/Pubs/TechRpts/2015/EECS-2015-167.html)
* **Slides** - RISC_V Workshop #3 (http://riscv.org/workshop-jan2016/Wed1345%20RISCV%20Workshop%203%20BOOM.pdf)
* **Video** - RISC-V Workshop #3 (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JuJDPbzWpR0)
* **Slides** - RISC-V Workshop #2 (http://riscv.org/workshop-jun2015/riscv-boom-workshop-june2015.pdf)
* **Video** - RISC-V Workshop #2 (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z8UInbiQbdA)


**Disclaimer!**

The RISC-V privileged ISA and platform specs are still in flux. BOOM will do its best to stay up-to-date with it!

BOOM is a work-in-progress and remains in active development.


**FAQ**

To be filled in as questions are asked...
