docs/sections/intro-overview/boom-pipeline.rst, before:

The BOOM Pipeline
=================

.. _boom-pipeline:
.. figure:: /figures/boom-pipeline.svg
    :alt: Default BOOM Pipeline with Stages

    Default BOOM Pipeline with Stages

Overview
--------

Conceptually, BOOM is broken up into 10 stages: **Fetch**, **Decode**,
**Register Rename**, **Dispatch**, **Issue**, **Register Read**, **Execute**, **Memory**,
**Writeback** and **Commit**. However, many of those stages are
combined in the current implementation, yielding **seven** stages:
**Fetch**, **Decode/Rename**, **Rename/Dispatch**, **Issue/RegisterRead**, **Execute**,
**Memory** and **Writeback** (**Commit** occurs asynchronously, so
it is not counted as part of the “pipeline").

Stages
------

Fetch
^^^^^

Instructions are *fetched* from the Instruction Memory and
pushed into a FIFO queue, known as the **Fetch Buffer**. Branch
prediction also occurs in this stage, redirecting the fetched
instructions as necessary. [1]_

Decode
^^^^^^

**Decode** pulls instructions out of the Fetch Buffer and
generates the appropriate **Micro-Op(s)** to place into the
pipeline. [2]_

Rename
^^^^^^

The ISA, or “logical", register specifiers (e.g. x0-x31) are
then *renamed* into “physical" register specifiers.

Dispatch
^^^^^^^^

The Micro-Op is then *dispatched*, or written, into
a set of **Issue Queues**.

Issue
^^^^^

Micro-Ops sitting in a Issue Queue wait until all of
their operands are ready and are then *issued*. [3]_ This is
the beginning of the out–of–order piece of the pipeline.

Register Read
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Issued Micro-Ops first **read** their register operands from the unified
physical register file (or from the bypass network)...

Execute
^^^^^^^

... and then enter the **Execute** stage where the functional
units reside. Issued memory operations perform their address
calculations in the **Execute** stage, and then store the
calculated addresses in the Load/Store Unit which resides in the
**Memory** stage.

Memory
^^^^^^

The Load/Store Unit consists of three queues: a **Load Address Queue
(LAQ)**, a **Store Address Queue (SAQ)**, and a **Store Data Queue (SDQ)**.
Loads are fired to memory when their address is present in the
LAQ. Stores are fired to memory at **Commit** time (and
naturally, stores cannot be **committed** until both their
address and data have been placed in the SAQ and SDQ).

Writeback
^^^^^^^^^

ALU operations and load operations are **written** back to the
physical register file.

Commit
^^^^^^

The **Reorder Buffer (ROB)**, tracks the status of each instruction
in the pipeline. When the head of the ROB is not-busy, the ROB
**commits** the instruction. For stores, the ROB signals to the
store at the head of the Store Queue (SAQ/SDQ) that it can now write its
data to memory.

Branch Support
--------------

BOOM supports full branch speculation and branch prediction. Each
instruction, no matter where it is in the pipeline, is accompanied by a
branch tag that marks which branches the instruction is “speculated
under". A mispredicted branch requires killing all instructions that
depended on that branch. When a branch instructions passes through
**Rename**, copies of the **Register Rename Table** and the **Free
List** are made. On a mispredict, the saved processor state is
restored.

Although :numref:`boom-pipeline` shows a simplified pipeline, BOOM
implements the RV64G and privileged ISAs, which includes single- and
double-precision floating point, atomic memory support, and page-based
virtual memory.

.. [1] While the Fetch Buffer is N-entries deep, it can instantly read
    out the first instruction on the front of the FIFO. Put another way,
    instructions don’t need to spend N cycles moving their way through
    the Fetch Buffer if there are no instructions in front of
    them.

.. [2] Because RISC-V is a RISC ISA, currently all instructions generate
    only a single Micro-Op. More details on how store Micro-Ops are
    handled can be found in :ref:`The Memory System and the Data-cache Shim`.

.. [3] More precisely, Micro-Ops that are ready assert their request, and the
    issue scheduler chooses which Micro-Ops to issue that cycle.

Commit message:

reorganize intro + add more details/diagrams [ci skip]

docs/sections/intro-overview/boom-pipeline.rst, after:

The BOOM Pipeline
=================

.. _boom-pipeline:
.. figure:: /figures/boom-pipeline.svg
    :alt: Simplified BOOM Pipeline with Stages

    Simplified BOOM Pipeline with Stages

Overview
--------

Conceptually, BOOM is broken up into 10 stages: **Fetch**, **Decode**,
**Register Rename**, **Dispatch**, **Issue**, **Register Read**, **Execute**, **Memory**,
**Writeback** and **Commit**. However, many of those stages are
combined in the current implementation, yielding **seven** stages:
**Fetch**, **Decode/Rename**, **Rename/Dispatch**, **Issue/RegisterRead**, **Execute**,
**Memory** and **Writeback** (**Commit** occurs asynchronously, so it is not counted as part of the “pipeline").
:numref:`boom-pipeline` shows a simplified BOOM pipeline that has all of the pipeline stages listed.

Stages
------

Fetch
^^^^^

Instructions are *fetched* from the Instruction Memory and
pushed into a FIFO queue, known as the **Fetch Buffer**. Branch
prediction also occurs in this stage, redirecting the fetched
instructions as necessary. [1]_

Decode
^^^^^^

**Decode** pulls instructions out of the Fetch Buffer and
generates the appropriate **Micro-Op(s)** to place into the
pipeline. [2]_

Rename
^^^^^^

The ISA, or “logical", register specifiers (e.g. x0-x31) are
then *renamed* into “physical" register specifiers.

Dispatch
^^^^^^^^

The Micro-Op is then *dispatched*, or written, into
a set of **Issue Queues**.

Issue
^^^^^

Micro-Ops sitting in a Issue Queue wait until all of
their operands are ready and are then *issued*. [3]_ This is
the beginning of the out–of–order piece of the pipeline.

Register Read
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Issued Micro-Ops first **read** their register operands from the unified
physical register file (or from the bypass network)...

Execute
^^^^^^^

... and then enter the **Execute** stage where the functional
units reside. Issued memory operations perform their address
calculations in the **Execute** stage, and then store the
calculated addresses in the Load/Store Unit which resides in the
**Memory** stage.

Memory
^^^^^^

The Load/Store Unit consists of three queues: a **Load Address Queue
(LAQ)**, a **Store Address Queue (SAQ)**, and a **Store Data Queue (SDQ)**.
Loads are fired to memory when their address is present in the
LAQ. Stores are fired to memory at **Commit** time (and
naturally, stores cannot be **committed** until both their
address and data have been placed in the SAQ and SDQ).

Writeback
^^^^^^^^^

ALU operations and load operations are **written** back to the
physical register file.

Commit
^^^^^^

The **Reorder Buffer (ROB)**, tracks the status of each instruction
in the pipeline. When the head of the ROB is not-busy, the ROB
**commits** the instruction. For stores, the ROB signals to the
store at the head of the Store Queue (SAQ/SDQ) that it can now write its
data to memory.

Branch Support
--------------

BOOM supports full branch speculation and branch prediction. Each
instruction, no matter where it is in the pipeline, is accompanied by a
branch tag that marks which branches the instruction is “speculated
under". A mispredicted branch requires killing all instructions that
depended on that branch. When a branch instructions passes through
**Rename**, copies of the **Register Rename Table** and the **Free
List** are made. On a mispredict, the saved processor state is
restored.

Detailed BOOM Pipeline
----------------------

Although :numref:`boom-pipeline` shows a simplified BOOM pipeline, BOOM supports RV64GC and the privileged ISA
which includes single-precision and double-precision floating point, atomic memory support, and page-based virtual memory.
A more detailed diagram is shown below in :numref:`boom-pipeline-detailed`.

.. _boom-pipeline:
.. figure:: /figures/boom-pipeline-detailed.png
    :alt: Detailed BOOM Pipeline

    Detailed BOOM Pipeline. \*'s denote where the core can be configured.

.. [1] While the Fetch Buffer is N-entries deep, it can instantly read
    out the first instruction on the front of the FIFO. Put another way,
    instructions don’t need to spend N cycles moving their way through
    the Fetch Buffer if there are no instructions in front of
    them.

.. [2] Because RISC-V is a RISC ISA, currently all instructions generate
    only a single Micro-Op. More details on how store Micro-Ops are
    handled can be found in :ref:`The Memory System and the Data-cache Shim`.

.. [3] More precisely, Micro-Ops that are ready assert their request, and the
    issue scheduler chooses which Micro-Ops to issue that cycle.
