The Register File and Bypass Network
====================================

.. _simple-boom-pipeline:
.. figure:: /figures/simple_boom_pipeline.png
    :alt: Single Issue Pipeline

    An example single-issue pipeline. The register file needs 3 read ports to satisfy FMA operations
    and 2 write ports to satisfy the variable latency operations without interfering with the fixed latency ALU
    and FP write-backs. To make scheduling of the write port trivial, the ALUâ€™s pipeline is lengthened to match
    the FPU latency. The ALU is able to bypass from any of these stages to dependent instructions in the
    Register Read stage.


BOOM is a unified, physical register file (PRF) design. The register
file holds both the committed and speculative state. The register file
also holds both integer and floating point register values. The map
tables track which physical register corresponds to which ISA register.

BOOM uses the Berkeley hardfloat floating point units which use an
internal 65-bit operand format
(https://github.com/ucb-bar/berkeley-hardfloat). Therefore, all physical
registers are 65-bits.

Register Read
-------------

The register file statically provisions all of the register read ports
required to satisfy all issued instructions. For example, if *issue port
#0* corresponds to an integer ALU and *issue port #1* corresponds to a
FPU, then the first two register read ports will statically serve the
ALU and the next three register read ports will service the FPU for five
total read ports.

Dynamic Read Port Scheduling
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Future designs can improve area-efficiency by provisioning fewer
register read ports and using dynamically scheduling to arbitrate for
them. This is particularly helpful as most instructions need only one
operand. However, it does add extra complexity to the design, which is
often manifested as extra pipeline stages to arbitrate and detect
structural hazards. It also requires the ability to kill issued
micro-ops and re-issue them from the issue window on a later cycle.

Bypass Network
--------------

ALU operations can be issued back-to-back by having the write-back
values forwarded through the bypass network. Bypassing occurs at the end
of the *Register Read* stage.
